#### 8.1. {#8_1} Applying, Processing, and Selecting.

Applicants must submit applicable documents listed in paragraphs [3.1.2](../chapter3/chapter3.md#3_1_2) and [3.1.6](../chapter3/chapter3.md#3_1_6). [Table 3.2](../chapter3/chapter3.md#table3_2) tells where to submit applications. The appointing authority determines a selectee's grade according to [Table 2.1](../chapter2/chapter2.md#table2_1) based on the amount of service credit awarded according to [Table 2.5](../chapter2/chapter2.md#table2_5). 

---
#### 8.2. {#8_2} Bioenvironmental Engineer (AFSC 43E1).

##### 8.2.1. {#8_2_1} Education.
The minimum requirement is a baccalaureate degree in engineering from an institution accredited by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology, or otherwise acceptable to HQ USAF/SG; or a master's degree in industrial hygiene acceptable to HQ USAF/SG for award of AFSC 43ElB or a baccalaureate degree in architecture or architectural engineering from an institution accredited by the National Architectural Accreditation Board for award of AFSC 43ElC or 43ElE. An individual under this program must sign a Statement of Understanding ([Attachment 7](../attachments/attachment7.md), A7.12). 

##### 8.2.2. {#8_2_2} Area of Experience.
Qualifying experience must be in a professional capacity, including: 

+ 8.2.2.1. The design, management, or investigation of works or a program for potable water, waste water, and industrial waste systems or other facets of environmental engineering; 

+ 8.2.2.2. The recognition, evaluation, and control of occupational stresses, including those related to noise, hazardous materials or agents, radiation, light, heat and cold; 

+ 8.2.2.3. The management of regulatory programs related to paragraph 8.2.2.1 or 8.2.2.2; 

+ 8.2.2.4. Research and development work in environmental engineering or occupational health areas; 

+ 8.2.2.5. Clinical as well as research and development facets of biomedical engineering; 

+ 8.2.2.6. The design and construction of health care facilities; or 

+ 8.2.2.7. Responsible teaching positions in subjects associated with paragraphs 8.2.2.1 and 8.2.2.2 in accredited educational institutions. 

---
#### 8.3. {#8_3} Medical Entomologist (AFSC 43M1).

##### 8.3.1. {#8_3_1} Education. 
The minimum requirement for this specialty is a master's degree in entomology. 

##### 8.3.2. {#8_3_2} Area of Experience.
Qualifying experience must be in medical entomology positions,including formulating policies and procedures, directing personnel in medical entomological activities, and conducting field and laboratory studies on development, testing, and application of insect control. 

---
#### 8.4. {#8_4} Biomedical Laboratory Officer (AFSC 43T1).

##### 8.4.1. {#8_4_1} Education. 
Applicants may qualify in one of four ways: 

+ 8.4.1.1. As a general biomedical laboratory officer (43T1A): Possess a baccalaureate degree (master’s degree desirable) acceptable to HQ USAF/SG and certified by either the American Society of Clinical Pathologists (ASCP) as a Medical Technologist (MT), or the National Certifying Agency (NCA) for Medical Laboratory personnel as a Clinical Laboratory Scientist (CLS). 

+ 8.4.1.2. For appointment as a specialist (43TlB, C, E, and G): Possess a master of science degree (Ph.D. is desirable) in one of the following fields related to biomedical laboratory work: chemistry, bacteriology, hematology, virology, toxicology, histology, parasitology, microbiology, or pharmacology, or as otherwise acceptable to HQ USAF/SG. Must additionally be board certified by one of the certifying boards listed in AFI 41-108, Training Affiliation Agreement Program, or as otherwise acceptable to HQ USAF/SG. 

+ 8.4.1.3. For appointment as a specialist (43T4D) in environmental and industrial hygiene chemistry: Possess a master of science degree in one of the following scientific disciplines or equivalent experience acceptable to HQ USAF/SG: industrial hygiene chemistry, inorganic chemistry, organic chemistry, or chemical toxicology. 

+ 8.4.1.4. To qualify for a USAF Medical Technology Internship: Possess a master of science degree discipline as outlined above is desirable. An individual appointed under this program must sign a statement of understanding ([Attachment 7](../attachments/attachment7.md), paragraph A7.8). 

##### 8.4.2. {#8_4_2} Area of Experience.
Experience must be in biomedical laboratory positions, including analysis, development, and application of procedures in chemistry, bacteriology, hematology, virology, serology, and tissue pathology. 

##### 8.4.3. {#8_4_3} Other.
For award of 43T3A, current certification by either the American Society of Clinical Pathologists as a Medical Technologist, or the National Certifying Agency for Medical Laboratory Personnel as a Clinical Laboratory Scientist, is mandatory. 

---
#### 8.5. {#8_5} Aerospace Physiologist (AFSC 43A1).

##### 8.5.1. {#8_5_1} Education.
The minimum requirement is a baccalaureate degree in physiology, zoology, or other related degrees acceptable to HQ USAF/SG. A master's degree in physiology or zoology is desirable. 

##### 8.5.2. {#8_5_2} Area of Experience.
Qualifying experience must be in aerospace physiology or related positions. Experience in physiological research, aviation human factors, and the development of physiological life support systems and equipment for aircrew personnel is desirable. 

##### 8.5.3. {#8_5_3} Medical Qualifications.
Applicants for aerospace physiologist must physically qualify for flying class III according to AFI 48-123. 

---
#### 8.6. {#8_6} Health Physicist (AFSC 43Y1).

##### 8.6.1. {#8_6_1} Education. 
The minimum requirement is a bachelor of science degree in health physics, radiobiology, radiological physics, radiation biophysics, or other health physics related subjects acceptable to HQ USAF/SG. 

##### 8.6.2. {#8_6_2} Area of Experience. 
Qualifying experience must be in controlling, shipping, and disposing of radiological materials; conducting radiological protection surveys; monitoring the treatment and disposal of radioactive wastes; calibrating instruments; conducting research 
in health or radiological physics; instruction in health physics, or directing health physics programs. 