#### 8.12. {#8_12} Pharmacist (AFSC 43P1).

##### 8.12.1. {#8_12_1} Education.
The minimum requirement is a baccalaureate degree in pharmacy. 

##### 8.12.2. {#8_12_2} Area of Experience.
Qualifying experience must be in pharmacy positions, including ordering pharmaceuticals, filling prescriptions, maintaining medication profiles, screening profiles for drug interactions, compounding extemporaneous preparation and directing pharmacy personnel. Hospital pharmacy experience, including patient and staff Education.
drug information, drug utilization review, and work with unit dose and intravenous admixture services is preferred. 

##### 8.12.3. {#8_12_3} Licensure.
A current license to practice pharmacy is required. Licensure may be waived for individuals appointed within 1 year after graduation. 

---
#### 8.13. {#8_13} Optometrist (AFSC 42E1).

##### 8.13.1. {#8_13_1} Education.
The minimum requirement is a degree in optometry from an accredited school of optometry. However, students may be conditionally tendered an appointment no earlier than 180 days before they attain the qualifying degree. On application, students sign and date a conditional tender of appointment ([Attachment 7](../attachments/attachment7.md), paragraph A7.6). 

##### 8.13.2. {#8_13_2} Area of Experience.
Qualifying experience must be in optometry positions, including conducting examinations of the eye to determine the presence of visual defects, prescribing lenses and orthoptic therapy to correct, conserve, or improve vision; detecting cases of ocular pathology; and examining and testing lenses for workmanship and conformance to prescriptions. 

##### 8.13.3. {#8_13_3} Licensure.
A current license to practice in a state or District of Columbia is required. Licensure may be waived for individuals appointed within 1 year after graduation. 

---
#### 8.14. {#8_14} Biomedical Specialist (AFSC 42N1/43B1).

##### 8.14.1. {#8_14_1} Education.
For all sub-specialties (AFSC 42NlA, Audiologist; AFSC 42NlB, Speech Therapist; and AFSC 43B1, Special), the minimum education requirement is a master's degree in the appropriate specialty. All degrees must be from accredited institutions of higher learning acceptable to HQ USAF/SG. 

##### 8.14.2. {#8_14_2} Area of Experience.
Qualifying experience must be in a full time position as an audiologist, speech pathologist, rehabilitation therapist (including providing care and treatment for human ailments), or planning, directing, and conducting research in one of these fields. 

##### 8.14.3. {#8_14_3} Licensure.
Certificate of Clinical Competence (CCC) from the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association is required. State licensure is highly desirable. 

---
#### 8.15. {#8_15} Podiatrist (AFSC 42F1).

##### 8.15.1. {#8_15_1} Education.
The minimum requirements are: have a Doctor of Podiatric Medicine from a college or university of podiatric medicine acceptable to HQ USAF/SG. It is highly desirable for the individual to have completed a postgraduate surgical residency. 

+ 8.15.1.1. Have a diploma from the National Board of Podiatry Examiners. 

##### 8.15.2. {#8_15_2} Area of Experience.
Qualifying experience must be in a full time position as a podiatrist, including the examination, diagnosis, treatment, prevention, and care of conditions and functions of the human foot by medical and surgical means and by other methods based on scientific knowledge. 

##### 8.15.3. {#8_15_3} Licensure.
A current license to practice podiatric medicine in a state or the District of Columbia is required. Licensure may be waived for individuals appointed within 1 year from the date they graduated from the Doctor of Podiatric Medicine program. 

---
#### 8.16. {#8_16} Physician Assistant (PA) (AFSC 42G1).

##### 8.16.1. {#8_16_1} Education.
Appoint those PAs who possess a baccalaureate degree in a health related field from an accredited college or university, and are graduates of a primary care physician assistant program approved by the American Medical Association Joint Review Committee on Education Programs for the Assistant to the Primary Care Physician (including the Air Force Physician Assistant program). 

##### 8.16.2. {#8_16_2} Licensure.
Certification by the National Commission on Certification of Physician Assistants is highly desirable. 

---
#### 8.17. {#8_17} Public Health Officer (AFSC 43H1).

##### 8.17.1. {#8_17_1} Education.
Doctor of Veterinary Medicine (DVM) degree or Bachelor of Science in Nursing (BSN) degree with a Master of Public Health (MPH) degree from a college recognized by HQ USAF/SG is required for entry into this AFSC. 

+ 8.17.1.1. In unique cases, and in consideration of acceptable experience in public health, the requirement for a DVM or BSN may be waived by HQ USAF/SG if the applicant has a Bachelor of Science degree (specialization) in a biomedical or biological science with an MPH degree with emphasis in environmental health, occupational medicine and epidemiology. 

##### 8.17.2. {#8_17_2} Experience.
It is desirable that an applicant has applied the required knowledge in basic epidemiology, food safety and sanitation,communicable diseases, and occupational health programs. 

---
#### 8.18. {#8_18} Chiropractor (AFSC 43BX).

##### 8.18.1. {#8_18_1} Education.
The minimum requirement is a doctoral degree from a chiropractic college approved by the Council on Chiropractic Education (CCE) and acceptable to HQ USAF/SG. 

##### 8.18.2. {#8_18_2} Experience.
Qualifying experience must include at least 1 year in health care services in an allopathic model immediately prior to accession. Experience in the allopathic model must include a case load and complexity considered sufficient by HQ USAF/SG, and all professional experience must have been accrued in the ethical practice of chiropractic. 

##### 8.18.3. {#8_18_3} Licensure.
Applicants must have taken and passed all parts of the National Board of Chiropractic Examiners test and have a current license to practice chiropractic in a state or the District of Columbia. Applicants must provide evidence of credentialing and privileging action in an allopathic model