#### 8.7. {#8_7} Clinical Psychologist (AFSC 42P1).

##### 8.7.1. {#8_7_1} Education.
An applicant may qualify in one of two ways: 

+ 8.7.1.1. Have a doctorate degree in psychology from an accredited college or university acceptable to HQ USAF/SG and have completed a clinical psychology internship acceptable to HQ USAF/SG. 

+ 8.7.1.2. Apply for a USAF Clinical Psychology Internship and have a doctorate degree in psychology, or be enrolled in the final year of a course leading to a doctorate degree in psychology from an accredited college or university. An individual under this program must sign a statement of understanding ([Attachment 7](../attachments/attachment7.md), paragraph A7.9).

##### 8.7.2. {#8_7_2} Area of Experience.
Qualifying experience must be in clinically oriented psychological positions and academic practice; administering, scoring, and interpreting psychological procedures; rehabilitation; or psychological research. 

##### 8.7.3. {#8_7_3} Licensure.
A current license to practice clinical psychology in a state or the District of Columbia is required for individuals qualifying for appointment under paragraph 8.7.1.1 Licensure may be waived for individuals appointed within 1 year from the date they graduated from the qualifying educational program and satisfied other applicable licensure criteria. 

---
#### 8.8. {#8_8} Clinical Social Worker (AFSC 42S1).

##### 8.8.1. {#8_8_1} Education.
An applicant must possess at least a master of social work degree from an accredited graduate school of social work. As part of the individual's graduate training, he or she must have: 

+ 8.8.1.1. Majored in casework and should have at least a 1-year field placement in a psychiatric or other mental health setting; or

+ 8.8.1.2. Majored in group work, community organization, or administration, and must have at least a 1-year placement in a psychiatric or other mental health setting. 

##### 8.8.2. {#8_8_2} Area of Experience.
In addition to the field placement requirements in paragraph [8.8.1](#8_8_1), it is desirable that an applicant be certified by the Academy of Certified Social Workers, and have professional social work experience in a mental health setting such as an adult mental health clinic, a child guidance clinic, an inpatient mental health service, or a community mental health program. 

---
#### 8.9. {#8_9} Dietitian (AFSC 43D1).

An applicant may qualify in one of two ways: 

##### 8.9.1. {#8_9_1} An applicant must have a baccalaureate degree from an approved school, college, or university and have completed a hospital dietetic internship or an equivalent program with equal emphasis on hospital food service administration and clinical dietetics, acceptable to HQ USAF/SG. Current status as a registered dietitian (R.D.) by the Commission of Dietetic Registration, a service of the American Dietetic Association, is required. Registration may be waived for individuals appointed within 1 year from date they completed the dietetic internship or equivalent program. 

##### 8.9.2. {#8_9_2} An applicant for the USAF Hospital Dietetic Internship must have completed, or be enrolled in the final year of a course leading to a baccalaureate degree from an accredited college or university and meet the academic requirements for entrance to a hospital or general dietetic internship. 

+ 8.9.2.1. An individual enrolled in the final year of an undergraduate degree program acceptable to HQ USAF/SG may apply for the USAF Hospital Dietetic Internship. 

+ 8.9.2.2. The applicant must include evidence of evaluated transcripts of credits through the central screening procedures used by the American Dietetic Association. When an individual applies for the dietetic internship, he or she must sign a statement of understanding ([Attachment 7](../attachments/attachment7.md), paragraph A7.8). 

---
#### 8.10. {#8_10} Occupational Therapist (AFSC 42T1).

An applicant must have: 

##### 8.10.1. {#8_10_1} A baccalaureate degree from an approved school, college, or university and have completed an occupational therapy course acceptable to HQ USAF/SG; or 

##### 8.10.2. {#8_10_2} A baccalaureate degree in occupational therapy from an approved school, college, or university. 

---
#### 8.11. {#8_11} Physical Therapist (AFSC 42B1).

##### 8.11.1. {#8_11_1} Education.
An applicant may qualify in one of three ways: have a baccalaureate degree from an approved school, college, or university and have completed a physical therapy certificate course acceptable to HQ USAF/SG; a baccalaureate degree in physical therapy from an approved school, college, or university; or be an AD Air Force member with a baccalaureate degree acceptable to HQ USAF/SG. 

8+ .11.1.1. These members will be appointed in the BSC and sponsored under an Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) program to complete master's degree requirements. An individual appointed under this program must sign the statement at [Attachment 7](../attachments/attachment7.md), paragraph A7.10. 

##### 8.11.2. {#8_11_2} Licensure.
A current license to practice in a state or the District of Columbia. Licensure may be waived for individuals appointed within 1 year after graduation. 