# Chapter 2: Eligibility, Ineligibility, and Appointment Guidelines


#### 2.1.{#2_1} Eligibility Factors.

To be eligible for appointment you must:

##### 2.1.1. {#2_1_1} Be of high moral character and personal qualifications.

##### 2.1.2. {#2_1_2} Be a United States (US) citizen. (Verify citizenship in accordance with AFI 31-501, Personnel Security Program Management.)

##### 2.1.3. {#2_1_3} Be medically qualified, or medically acceptable with waiver for an AF commission, according to AFI 48-123, Medical Examination and Standards. 

##### 2.1.4. {#2_1_4} Be at least 18 years old. [Table 2.1](./table2.1.md) shows the maximum age for appointment in the various grades. Age criteria for appointments through AFROTC and OTS are in AFI 36-2011, Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps and AFI 36-2013, Officer Training School(OTS) and Airman Commissioning Programs.

##### 2.1.5. {#2_1_5} Have a baccalaureate or higher degree. (See [Attachment 1](../attachments/attachment1.md)). 

##### 2.1.6. {#2_1_6} Understand that to be eligible for retired pay under Title 10, U.S.C., Section 12731, the last 6 years of qualifying service must be as a member of any category named in Section 12732(a)(1) of this title, but not while a member of a Regular component, the Fleet Reserve, or the Fleet Marine Corps Reserve. (The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1995 change expires 30 Sep 1999; unless further extended, the last 6 years reverts back to the last 8 years on 1 Oct 1999.) 

##### 2.1.7. {#2_1_7} Meet additional eligibility requirements prescribed under other sections of this instruction for the applicable commissioning program. 

----

#### 2.2. {#2_2} Ineligibility Factors.
[Table 2.2](./table2.2.md) lists conditions that make persons ineligible for appointment. 

