# Chapter 2: Eligibility, Ineligibility, and Appointment Guidelines

#### 2.15. {#2_15} Unit of Assignment Instructions. 
##### 2.15.1. {#2_15_1} Determine whether the applicant meets the eligibility requirements. 

##### 2.15.2. {#2_15_2} Schedule eligible applicants for AFOQT and medical examination. 

##### 2.15.3. {#2_15_3} Verify through the personnel data system (PDS) that the applicant meets the personnel security investigative requirements of paragraph [3.6](../chapter3/chapter3.md#3_6). If not, initiate a request for a Personnel Security Investigation (PSI). 

##### 2.15.4. {#2_15_4} Help the applicant complete and assemble the forms and documents that make up the application package (paragraph [3.1.2](../chapter3/chapter3.md#3_1_2)). 

+ 2.15.4.1. In item 26 of AF Form 24, Application for Appointment as Reserves of the Air Force or USAF Without Component, enter all civilian employment during the last 10 years. Explain in detail. Include a copy of the job description for each position held, if available. If the applicant is attending college full time, so state and show the major field of study. Attach: 

	+ 2.15.4.1.1. AF Form 1145, Evaluation of Commissioning Applicants. 

		+ 2.15.4.1.1.1. Before the interview, the applicant's unit of assignment commander (or supervising commissioned officer, if the member is geographically separated from the commander) completes items 11 and 12. 

		+ 2.15.4.1.1.2. If the applicant is not a ResAF member, the interviewer completes the evaluation items and the next level of authority endorses it. 

		+ 2.15.4.1.1.3. The evaluator includes in item 13 specific statements about the applicant's leadership and officer potential, ability to use resources, and readiness to accept responsibility, and gives facts and achievements typical of the applicant's performance. If the applicant is a sergeant (pay grade E-4) or below, the evaluator should address individual qualities such as military bearing, behavior, and how the applicant compares with his or her peers. 

	+ 2.15.4.1.2. The signed statement paragraph [2.14.3](#2_14_3) requires: 

	+ 2.15.4.1.3. A copy of last five enlisted performance reports (EPR). Individuals from other branches may substitute corresponding rating reports. USAFR unit assigned personnel under the grade of SSgt do not receive EPRs. 

	+ 2.15.4.1.4. A copy of current Record Review Report of Individual Personnel (RREV RIP) printout, if a ResAF member. 

	+ 2.15.4.1.5. Results of AFOQT. 

	+ 2.15.4.1.6. A signed statement that the applicant meets all requirements. 

+ 2.15.4.2. Complete all items on the SF 88, Report of Medical Examination, except items 16, 17, 63, 65, 70, and 72. HQ AFRC/SG or HQ ARPC/SG reviews and certifies medical examination reports according to AFI 48-123. 

+ 2.15.4.3. If the applicant is a ResAF member, determine whether current enlistment will expire before the anticipated commissioning date. If it will, reenlist the member according to AFI 36-3207, Separating Commissioned Officers, or voluntarily extend the member. 

+ 2.15.4.4. Submit applications according to Chapter 3. 

##### 2.15.5. {#2_15_5} Advertise vacancies or projected vacancies to Reserve recruiters.
The unit of assignment commander may consider enlisted personnel within the unit. Category A unit commanders will convene a selection board of three field grade officers when there is more than one applicant for a position. If there is more than one applicant for a Category B position, attached unit commander will choose the best qualified applicant for the position. Factors bearing on selection include but are not limited to the applicant's potential, Reserve participation, education, civilian employment, supervisor's comments, AF Form 1145, Evaluation of Commissioning Applicants, and qualifications any additional documentation
substantiates. 

----
#### 2.16. {#2_16} Major Command (MAJCOM) Processing Instructions.

##### 2.16.1. {#2_16_1} HQ AFRC/DPMB (for non-EAD Reserve airmen): 

+ 2.16.1.1. Reviews applications for eligibility and completeness. 

+ 2.16.1.2. Prepares applications for presentation to HQ AFRC/CC/CV, as appropriate, for approval or disapproval. 

+ 2.16.1.3. Forwards approved applications to HQ ARPC/ DPRB for appointment and assignment action. 

##### 2.16.2. {#2_16_2} Other MAJCOMs, Field Operating Activities (FOA) and Direct Reporting Units (DRU) (for IMA applicants): 

+ 2.16.2.1. Review applications for eligibility and completeness. 

+ 2.16.2.2. Endorse properly completed applications to HQ ARPC/DAO recommending approval or disapproval. 

----
#### 2.17. {#2_17} HQ ARPC Processing Instructions.

##### 2.17.1. {#2_17_1} For all applicants, completes all actions associated with appointing and assigning selected applicants. This includes discharging the selectee from airman status 1 day before the airman accepts a commission. HQ ARPC commander will review and approve or disapprove commissioning applications for USAFR Airmen not on EAD received from attached unit commanders for Category B positions. 

##### 2.17.2. {#2_17_2} Forwards a copy of the appointment order to HQ AFRC/DPMB on personnel commissioned under paragraphs [2.4](#2_4) through [2.7](#2_7) and [2.13](#2_13). 

----
#### 2.18. {#2_18} Determining Service Credit.
The Reserve Officer Personnel Management Act (ROPMA) repealed Title 10, U.S.C., Section 8353, and enacted Section 12207, effective 1 October 1996. Appointing authorities must use this provision of law as implemented in this instruction to appoint persons in the Reserves on or after 1 October 1996. 

##### 2.18.1. {#2_18_1} Service credit includes: 

+ 2.18.1.1. Credit for prior commissioned service as a Regular or Reserve officer within the following limitations: 

	+ 2.18.1.1.1. Medical or dental officers ([Table 2.4](#table2_4), rules 8 and 10). 

	+ 2.18.1.1.2. BSC, MSC, NC officers ([Table 2.5](#table2_5), rules 43 through 46). 

	+ 2.18.1.1.3. Chaplains, judge advocates, or line officers ([Table 2.6](#table2_6), rules 4 through 7 and 10 through 15). 

+ 2.18.1.2. Constructive service credit awarded to officers selected for appointment or designation to perform professional functions that the Air Force needs. 

##### 2.18.2. {#2_18_2} Service credit cannot exceed 14 years. 

+ 2.18.2.1. The total entry grade credit granted shall be no more than required for an officer to be eligible for an original appointment in the grade of major. The SAF may waive the entry grade limit of major to permit appointment in the grades of lieutenant colonel or colonel to relieve manning shortfalls in a specialty, or prevent a serious inequity in the appointment action. In these cases, credit will be limited to the amount required for appointment in these grades. 

+ 2.18.2.2. HQ AFPC/DPAM,ANG/MPP, or HQ ARPC/DAO may waive the limit for appointment of medical and dental officers in the grade of lieutenant colonel in shortage specialties designated by the HQ USAF Surgeon General (SG). Limit lieutenant colonels to no more than 21 years service credit. Depending on the officer's competitive category, use [Table 2.4](#table2_4), [Table 2.5](#table2_5), or [Table 2.6](#table2_6) to determine service credit. 

+ 2.18.2.3. Forward recommendations for appointment as a colonel only when HQ AFPC/DPAM, ANG/MPPMO, HQ ARPC/SG, or HQ AFRC/SG recommends approval. HQ AFPC/DPAM routes recommended approvals through HQ USAF/SG. HQ ARPC/SG and HQ AFRC/SG route recommended approvals through the Air Force Reserve Command Surgeon (HQ USAF/REM) enroute to the SAF. Limit colonels to no more than 23 years service credit. HQ ARPC/DAO will prepare formal appointment nomination packages for all Air Force Reserve nominations. Packages will include proper approval by the President and Senate. 

##### 2.18.3. {#2_18_3} A period of time, or qualification, counts only once when computing service credit. Count constructive service credit listed in [Table 2.4](#table2_4), [Table 2.5](#table2_5), and [Table 2.6](#table2_6) for education or professional training. When education or training overlaps other creditable service, count the constructive service first, then reduce the other creditable service for any overlapping period. Award full constructive credit through the date the officer completed professional requirements. 

+ 2.18.3.1. HQ AFPC/DPPAOR (Service Verification) annotates the oath of office and statement of service to show the date the officer completed professional requirements. The person who annotates the oath of office and statement of service authenticates the annotation by including his or her name, office symbol, and the date. 

+ 2.18.3.2. Within the limits of [Table 2.4](#table2_4), [Table 2.5](#table2_5), and [Table 2.6](#table2_6), treat any remaining time between the date the officer completed professional requirements and the day before EAD as commissioned service in an active status. 

##### 2.18.4. {#2_18_4} Proportionately credit to the nearest day qualifying periods of less than 1 year except where otherwise noted in [Table 2.4](#table2_4), [Table 2.5](#table2_5), and [Table 2.6](#table2_6). 

##### 2.18.5. {#2_18_5} Service credit does not apply to persons being initially commissioned through OTS or AFROTC. 

##### 2.18.6. {#2_18_6} Without specific congressional direction, appointing authorities cannot apply constructive service credit or service credit entitlements (grandfathering) retroactively and a member cannot terminate his or her appointment and request reappointment in order to take advantage of changes to constructive service credit or service credit rules. 

----
#### 2.19. {#2_19} Determining Grade, Computing and Recording Total Years Service Date (TYSD), Date of Rank (DOR), and Total Federal Commissioned Service Date (TFCSD).

##### 2.19.1. {#2_19_1} Use [Table 2.3](#table2_3) to determine grade and compute TYSD, DOR, and TFCSD. 

##### 2.19.2. {#2_19_2} Enter the TYSD, DOR, and TFCSD on the file copy of the appointment documents, in the PDS, and on records. 

##### 2.19.3. {#2_19_3} Do not compute TYSD and DOR for officers holding only USAF (temporary) appointments. 