# Chapter 2: Eligibility, Ineligibility, and Appointment Guidelines

#### 2.3.{#2_3} Waivers.
##### 2.3.1.{#2_3_1} General Information. 
Forward waiver requests of eligibility or ineligibility criteria through appropriate command channels only if recommending approval. The overriding consideration is the best interest of the Air Force.

##### 2.3.2.{#2_3_2} Age Waivers. 
[Table 2.1](#table2_1) shows maximum age for grades. The agencies below may not grant age waivers for appointment in the grade of second lieutenant beyond age 35. In the most unusual cases or the extraordinary qualifications of the individual, they may grant an age waiver for appointment in the grade of first lieutenant or higher. Waivers will not exceed the maximum age limit by more than 3 years. The following organizational activities consider age waivers: 
+ 2.3.2.1. HQ AFPC/DPAM (Force Management Branch), for persons who apply for appointment as medical service officers to fill active force requirements. 
+ 2.3.2.2. HQ ARPC/DAO (Appointments Branch), for persons who apply for appointment to fill authorized position vacancies in the USAFR Ready Reserve. 
+ 2.3.2.3. ANG/MPP, for persons who apply for appointment to fill Air National Guard of the United States (ANGUS) vacancies. 
+ 2.3.2.4. NGB/HC, for persons who apply for appointment as ANGUS chaplains.
+ 2.3.2.5. HQ USAF/JAX, for persons who apply for appointment as judge advocates. 
+ 2.3.2.6. AF/HC, for persons who apply for appointment as chaplains to fill RegAF requirements.
+ 2.3.2.7. HQ AFRC/HC, for persons who apply for appointment to fill USAFR Ready Reserve vacancies as chaplains.
+ 2.3.2.8. HQ AFPC/DPSIP, for persons who apply for appointment in other categories.

##### 2.3.3.{#2_3_3} Moral Waivers.
Refer to AFI 36-2002, Regular Air Force and Special Category Accessions, for list of typical offenses and waivers. 
+ 2.3.3.1. Waiver approval authorities for applicants convicted or adversely adjudicated of Category I, II, and III offenses are: 
	+ 2.3.3.1.1. AFRS/CC (may delegate to Recruiting Squadron/CC), for persons who apply for appointment to perform on EAD as medical service officers or for former officers applying for appointment to perform on EAD as LAF officers.
	+ 2.3.3.1.2. AFRC/CV (Vice Commander), for appointment of ARTs and other non-EAD assigned airmen to Category A units. 
	+ 2.3.3.1.3. Appointing authority for all other applicants. 
+ 2.3.3.2. Waiver approval authorities for persons convicted or adversely adjudicated of Category IV and V offenses are: 
	+ 2.3.3.2.1. HQ ARPC/DP for persons applying for appointment in the programs in paragraph [1.14](../chapter1/chapter1.md#1_14). 
	+ 2.3.3.2.2. ANG/MPP for persons applying for appointment to fill ANGUS vacancies. 	
	+ 2.3.3.2.3. RS/CC for persons applying for the OTS commissioning program or for former officers applying for appointment to perform on EAD as LAF officers.
	+ 2.3.3.2.4. Appointing authority for all other applicants.
+ 2.3.3.3. Appointing authority for chaplains to fill active force requirements and ANGUS vacancies. 
	+ 2.3.3.3.1. HQ AFPC/DPAH.

##### 2.3.4. {#2_3_4} Other Waivers. 

+ 2.3.4.1. The appointing authority may waive conditions listed in [Table 2.2](#table2_2), items 9, 10 and 13 (acknowledgment executed for item 13 becomes a part of the application). The appointing authority may also waive conditions listed in [Table 2.2](#table2_2), items 17, 20, and 21. 
+ 2.3.4.2. The following may waive conditions listed in [Table 2.2](#table2_2), items 23 and 25: 
	+ 2.3.4.2.1. HQ ARPC/DAO for persons applying for appointment to fill USAFR Ready Reserve positions. 
	+ 2.3.4.2.2. HQ AFRC/SG (Surgeon), for persons applying for appointment as medical service officers with assignment to AFRC units. 
	+ 2.3.4.2.3. HQ AFRC/DPMB, for persons applying for appointment with assignment to vacant Category A positions. 
	+ 2.3.4.2.4. ANG/MPP, for persons applying for appointment to fill ANGUS vacancies. 
	+ 2.3.4.2.5. AFPC/DPSIP for former officers who apply for appointment to perform EAD as LAF officers.
+ 2.3.4.3. DELETED
	+ 2.3.4.3.1. DELETED
	+ 2.3.4.3.2. DELETED
	+ 2.3.4.3.3. DELETED
	+ 2.3.4.3.4. DELETED
	+ 2.3.4.3.5. DELETED
	+ 2.3.4.3.6. DELETED
+ 2.3.4.4. The following organizational activities may waive licensing, registration, and 
certification requirements: 
	+ 2.3.4.4.1. HQ AFPC/DPAM, for persons who apply for appointment to perform on EAD. 
	+ 2.3.4.4.2. HQ AFRC/SG or HQ ARPC/SG (Directorate of Health Services Individual Reserve Programs), as appropriate, for persons who apply for appointment to fill vacancies in any of the USAFR Ready Reserve programs. 
	+ 2.3.4.4.3. ANGRC/SG, for persons who apply for appointment to fill ANGUS vacancies. 
+ 2.3.4.5. Waiver authorities specified in AFI 48-123 may approve waivers of physical requirements. 
+ 2.3.4.6. ANGI 36-2005, Appointment of Officers in the Air National Guard of the United States and as Reserves of the Air Force(for ANGUS applicants) outlines waiver procedures concerning drug and alcohol abuse.
