# Chapter 2: Eligibility, Ineligibility, and Appointment Guidelines

#### 2.4. {#2_4} Former Officers of the Regular Air Force (RegAF).

##### 2.4.1. {#2_4_1} An officer who submits an unqualified resignation following a period of honorable service and who has a remaining Military Service Obligation (MSO) or unfulfilled contractual agreement, is discharged if he or she accepts a Reserve appointment in the grade held in the RegAF at the time of discharge. HQ ARPC/DAO initially transfers an officer with a remaining MSO to the Ready Reserve and assigns the officer to the ORS, ARPC, unless they applied for a Ready Reserve participating assignment. 

##### 2.4.2. {#2_4_2} An officer, who has no MSO or unfulfilled contractual agreement and who is honorably discharged by reason of unqualified resignation, may request appointment as a ResAF officer at the time of resignation. 

+ 2.4.2.1. The unit commander must submit a memorandum of recommendation or non-recommendation, which will accompany the request. For non-recommendation, the commander specifies the reasons and gives the officer a copy. The commander also promptly notifies HQ ARPC/DAO and the servicing military personnel flight (MPF), if, after submitting a recommendation for Reserve appointment, the recommendation changes. Approval for ResAF appointment may be withdrawn if it is determined that the appointment would not be in the best interest of the Air Force. 

+ 2.4.2.2. Since accepting a Reserve commission constitutes voluntary assignment to the Ready Reserve (IRR or Selected), HQ ARPC/DAO transfers officers appointed under paragraph [2.4.2](#2_4_2) to the Ready Reserve and assigns them to the Nonobligated Nonparticipating Ready Personnel Section (NNRPS), unless they applied for a Ready Reserve participating assignment. 

+ 2.4.2.3. The officer accepts the ResAF appointment, by memorandum, and completes the oath of office as a Reserve officer on the day after discharge to ensure continuous commissioned status. The oath of office must be executed and returned to HQ ARPC/DAO within 15 calendar days of discharge or the Reserve appointment is canceled. To decline a Reserve appointment, applicants must so state in writing to HQ ARPC/DAO within 15 calendar days of discharge, with the reasons for declination. 

##### 2.4.3. {#2_4_3} An officer who resigns to enter seminary training is not eligible for appointment as a ResAF officer. Under law, an individual preparing for the ministry in a recognized theological or divinity school may not be required to serve on AD or participate in active duty training or service, active duty for training (ADT), or inactive duty training (IDT). However, the officer may apply for appointment as a chaplain or chaplain candidate after meeting the requirements specified in Chapter 5. 

##### 2.4.4. {#2_4_4} An officer who does not request a ResAF appointment upon resignation, or who originally declined a Reserve appointment, may ask HQ ARPC/DAO for Reserve appointment consideration up to 12 months after discharge. 

##### 2.4.5. {#2_4_5} In addition to other requirements, a former chaplain submits a current DD Form 2088, Statement of Ecclesiastical Endorsement, for appointment as a ResAF.

----
#### 2.5. {#2_5} Former Officers of Any of the Uniformed Services.
Except for those ineligible under [Table 2.2](#table2_2) appointing authorities may appoint former officers of any of the services for duty in any specialty for which they qualify and for which there is a procurement quota. They may not appoint former officers based solely on prior service, except as provided in this instruction. 

----
#### 2.6. {#2_6} Reserve Officers of Other Uniformed Services.
Appointing authorities may not tender ResAF appointment to a Reserve officer of another uniformed service not on EAD whose service dates, Total Years Service Date (TYSD) and Date of Rank (DOR) place the officer beyond the mandatory phase point for promotion to the next Reserve grade. They may tender ResAF appointment to a Reserve officer of another uniformed service, if, in addition to the application and allied papers, they meet the following requirements: 

##### 2.6.1. {#2_6_1} Age does not exceed the maximum for the grade ([Table 2.1](#table2_1)). If applying for flying training, the officer must commission in time to enter the program before age 27 1/2 years. 

##### 2.6.2. {#2_6_2} A Ready Reserve position vacancy exists for which the officer qualifies. 

##### 2.6.3. {#2_6_3} No ResAF officer with the required qualifications and residing within a reasonable distance of the assignment is available for, volunteers for, and will accept the assignment. 

##### 2.6.4. {#2_6_4} The officer submits AF Form 1288, Application for Ready Reserve Assignment, in triplicate. 

##### 2.6.5. {#2_6_5} The officer does not have an AD obligation under the Military Selective Service Act of 1967. 

##### 2.6.6. {#2_6_6} The officer obtains a conditional release from the uniformed service or component in which he holds an appointment. 

##### 2.6.7. {#2_6_7} If the officer holds an aeronautical rating, HQ USAF/XOOT (Training and Warrior Management Division) must approve the aeronautical rating before processing the application to completion. If the officer is in inactive aviation service status, refer to AFI 11-402, Aviation and Parachutist Service, Aeronautical Ratings and Badges, for revalidation or requalification process. 

##### 2.6.8. {#2_6_8} The officer is not in a failed promotion status. NOTE: Refer to [Table 2.3](#table2_3) when calculating entry grade credit. 

----
#### 2.7. {#2_7} Former Officers Who Held an Aeronautical Rating. 
Appointing authorities may appoint former officers of any of the uniformed services (including RegAF officers who did not apply for Reserve commission within 12 months after resigning) who held an aeronautical rating to fill aircrew positions in the ANGUS, USAFR Ready Reserve, or on EAD. The applicant must meet the following eligibility requirements:

##### 2.7.1. {#2_7_1} Be available for, and agree to participate in, an aircrew position in the ANGUS, USAFR Ready Reserve, or on EAD for at least 4 years after being appointed.

##### 2.7.2. {#2_7_2} Qualify or requalify for an Air Force aeronautical rating or have previous Air Force aeronautical orders revalidated under AFI 11-402. 

##### 2.7.3. {#2_7_3} Not have a previous appointment terminated for cause. 

##### 2.7.4. {#2_7_4} Meet all criteria for initial appointment as a ResAF officer, except that age may exceed the normal maximum by the number of years of previous commissioned service. 

##### 2.7.5. {#2_7_5} Not have held a permanent Reserve grade higher than major (or equivalent) at the time of discharge. 

##### 2.7.6. {#2_7_6} Never nonselected for promotion to the next higher grade. 

----
#### 2.8. {#2_8} OTS and AFROTC Graduates.
In addition to meeting the eligibility requirements in this instruction, AFROTC and OTS graduates must meet the requirements in AFIs 36-2011 and 2013. 

----
#### 2.9. {#2_9} Appointment as a ResAF Officer for Assignment to the Retired Reserve and Placement on the US Air Force Reserve Retired List.
Appointing authorities may appoint an individual who qualifies for membership in the Retired Reserve under AFI 36-3203, Service Retirements, and does not hold a Reserve commission under this paragraph for the sole purpose of assignment to the Retired Reserve. 

##### 2.9.1. {#2_9_1} Appoint in the highest grade the individual is eligible for by law. 

##### 2.9.2. {#2_9_2} Air Force Reserve members who choose discharge, in lieu of transfer to the Retired Reserve, will not be allowed to reaffiliate and will only be entitled to retired pay and medical care at age 60. This policy became effective 15 June 1993. 

----
#### 2.10. {#2_10} Appointment as a ResAF Officer on Removal From the Temporary Disability Retired List (TDRL) (Title 10, U.S.C., Section 1211).
Reappoint a member removed from TDRL after a finding of physically fit, the day following discharge from the TDRL, in the Reserve grade with DOR held when the member was placed on the TDRL. 

----
#### 2.11. {#2_11} Posthumous Appointments.
Posthumous appointment as a ResAF officer may be issued in the name of an Air Force member who was selected for appointment, or successfully completed officer training and was recommended for appointment by the school's commander, and died in the line of duty. (AFROTC cadets are not eligible for posthumous appointments.) The MAJCOM sends a request to publish the posthumous appointment to HQ AFPC/DPPAO. (No financial benefits accrue as a result of a posthumous appointment.) 


----

#### 2.13. {#2_13} Process for Appointing USAFR Airmen Not on EAD.
Appointing authorities direct appointment of qualified airmen not on EAD to officer status and a concurrent Selected Reserve assignment to fill a unit vacancy only in Line of the Air Force (LAF) specialties and in the grade of second lieutenant. 

##### 2.13.1. {#2_13_1} On discharging an airman to accept appointment under this program, the Reserve servicing MPF disposes of the field record group (FRGp) according to AFI 36-2608, Military Personnel Records Systems. 

##### 2.13.2. {#2_13_2} The base director of personnel (DP) informs a selectee who is an ART that the ART position must be vacated if accepting appointment. 

##### 2.13.3. {#2_13_3} HQ AFRC/DPMB or HQ ARPC/DRM (Individual Programs Division) schedules the member to attend an officer training class. 

----
#### 2.14. {#2_14} Qualifications for Appointing USAFR Airmen Not on EAD.
In addition to meeting the requirements in this chapter, applicants must: 

##### 2.14.1. {#2_14_1} Never before have held a commission. 

##### 2.14.2. {#2_14_2} If applying before receipt of baccalaureate degree, be enrolled in the senior year of undergraduate study and scheduled to graduate on or before the end of the fiscal year in which the selection board meets. The applicant must furnish an official transcript or certification from the registrar that provides the projected graduation date. Selectees must furnish evidence that the qualifying degree has been conferred and they meet all other applicable requirements before appointments. 

##### 2.14.3. {#2_14_3} Agree to meet the training requirements for the training category in which assigned and remain assigned for 3 years (nonrated officers) or 5 years (rated officers) after appointment. Applicant will complete a statement of understanding. 

##### 2.14.4. {#2_14_4} Be tentatively selected for assignment to a vacant lieutenant or captain position in a training Category A unit or to an authorized IMA position in an active duty Air Force unit. For unit personnel, the NAF, wing or group commander may approve one or two grade under grade waivers for all AFRC unit assigned applicants. 

##### 2.14.5. {#2_14_5} Agree, in writing, to attend officer training. 

##### 2.14.6. {#2_14_6} Achieve minimum AFOQT scores. 

##### 2.14.7. {#2_14_7} If applying for an ART position, qualify for the required civil service rating of the position. 
