#### 3.1 {#3_1}. How To Apply.

###### 3.1.1. {#3_1_1} Recruiters or base education services offices assist individuals applying for appointment to enter active duty. 

+ 3.1.1.1. The Reserve servicing MPF, unit commander, or Reserve recruiter where the vacancy exists, assists individuals applying for appointment to fill authorized vacancies in the Ready Reserve units of the USAFR and ANGUS.

+ 3.1.1.2. Before requesting any information concerning Social Security Number (SSN) and specific personnel data, brief the applicant on the provisions of the Privacy Act and give the applicant a copy of AF Form 883, Privacy Act Statement -US Air Force Application Record. Document on any retained records the date on which the applicant was briefed and provided AF Form 883. 

###### 3.1.2. {#3_1_2} Except for procedures that apply to OTS and AFROTC, the documents in paragraphs 3.1.2.1 through 3.1.2.12 constitute the basic application. 

+ 3.1.2.1. AF Form 24, Application for Appointment as Reserves of the Air Force or USAF Without Component (in duplicate). In the upper right hand corner, specify the specialty for which applying. The "Applicant Briefing Item on Separation Policy" ([Attachment 4](../attachments/attachment4.md)) must be attached as an annex to AF Form 24. NOTE: This is a requirement only for civilian applicants and enlisted members.

+ 3.1.2.2. Prior service records. If the applicant has prior: 

	 + 3.1.2.2. Commissioned military service but has resigned that commission, have the applicant authorize release of the records (by SF 180, Request Pertaining to Military Records, or by letter) to the appropriate activity listed in [Table 3.2](#table3_2) (see exceptions below). 

	 	+ 3.1.2.2.1.1. Request that copies of the prior service records include an order reflecting the most current promotion and DOR, the date of original commission, inclusive dates of active and inactive service, type and date of discharge or release, all performance reports, and a statement of service showing all active, inactive, and Extension Course Institute course points for Reserve time. 

		+ 3.1.2.2.1.2. Request records as early in the application process as possible. If applying for assignment in the medical service under Chapter 6, Chapter 7, or Chapter 8, with concurrent assignment to the Ready Reserve or to a Category A Reserve unit, have the applicant authorize release of the records to HQ ARPC/DAO. 

	 + 3.1.2.2. Enlisted service but was discharged or released, submit a copy of DD Form 4-1-2, Enlistment/Reenlistment Document-Armed Forces of the United States; DD Form 214, (undeleted copy); and if applicable, DD Form 215; discharge or release order, and discharge certificate. If not available, have the applicant request documents from the appropriate branch of service. 

		+ 3.1.2.2.2.1. Military service in any uniformed service (except the Public Health Service) and still holds a commission or enlisted status, request the parent uniformed service release the records to the appropriate activity listed in [Table 3.2](#table3_2)

		+ 3.1.2.2.2.2. Commissioned or enlisted service in the Public Health Service, still holds a commission, or has resigned or been discharged, submit a complete statement of service and copies of performance evaluations. If the statement of service does not indicate whether member is in a failed promotion status, include a statement that the individual is not currently in a failed promotion status.

+ 3.1.2.3. SF 88, Report of Medical Examination; SF 93, Report of Medical History and electrocardiogram (EKG). Submit original and two copies of SFs 88 and 93. Be sure the documents meet the validity requirements of AFI 48-143, chapter 1. NOTE: Air Force AD enlisted personnel applying for commission in the MSC (Chapter 7) do not submit physical examination documents unless selected for appointment.

+ 3.1.2.4. Results of a National Agency Check(NAC), a favorably completed Entrance National Agency Check (ENTNAC) with a break in service of less than 24 months or written confirmation that a prior check is acceptable. Applicants for the health professions, chaplains, or judge advocates do not submit results of a NAC as long as they meet requirements of paragraph [3.6.](#3_6) Applicants for these positions submit a completed SF Form 86, Questionnaire for National Security Positions, as part of their application.

+ 3.1.2.5. Official transcripts of all college work. Final transcript must include the day, month, and year of award of degree. EXCEPTION: International medical graduates may submit a photostatic or certified copy of their college diploma. If the diploma is not in English, include translation.

+ 3.1.2.6. Conditional release from parent uniformed service, if applicable.

+ 3.1.2.7. DD Form 785, Record of Disenrollment From Officer Candidate-Type Training, if applicable. The command or activity responsible for processing the application obtains the DD Form 785. AFI 36-2012 tells where and how to obtain the form. If the DD Form 785 does not provide sufficient information, send a request for additional facts to the appropriate address shown in AFI 36-2012 or to the MAJCOM responsible for the commissioning program.

+ 3.1.2.8. AF Form 2030, USAF Drug and Alcohol Abuse Certificate. Include a drug and alcohol abuse circumstances statement ([Attachment 5](../attachments/attachment5.md), A5.1) if the applicant answers "yes" to any of the questions on the AF Form 2030.

+ 3.1.2.9. AF Form 1288, if appointment is contingent on assignment to a USAFR Ready Reserve unit or IMA position, as required by AFI 36-2115, Assignments Within the Reserve Components. 

+ 3.1.2.10.AF Form 3010, USAFStatement of Understanding, Dependent Care Responsibilities. Only applicants for appointment to perform on EAD who have family members or a military spouse submit this form. Include the name, relationship, and date of birth of each family member (including spouse) in the remarks section of the form. 

+ 3.1.2.11. DELETED

+ 3.1.2.12. DELETED

###### 3.1.3. {#3_1_3} For additional documents required to apply for appointment as a judge advocate, chaplain, or medical service officer, see paragraphs [3.1.4](#3_1_4), [3.1.5](#3_1_5) or [3.1.6](#3_1_6). Submit applications according to [Table 3.2](#table3_2). 

+ 3.1.3.1. Officers applying for reappointment as judge advocates under Chapter 4 do not submit the documents required by paragraphs 3.1.2.3, 3.1.2.4, and 3.1.2.9. Officers already designated as judge advocates or assigned to The Judge Advocate General's Department who apply for reappointment under Chapter 4 do not submit documents previously submitted if the documents are still current (for example, certificate of graduation from an American Bar Association accredited law school).

+ 3.1.3.2. LAF officers desiring reappointment to the MSC or BSC submit a memorandum of application according to paragraph [3.8](#3_8). 

###### 3.1.4. {#3_1_4} For applications under Chapter 4, include the following documents in addition to those required in paragraph [3.1.2](#3_1_2). 

+ 3.1.4.1. A copy of certificate of graduation from an American Bar Association accredited law school.

+ 3.1.4.2. A certificate from the proper court clerk indicating original admission date and present standing at the bar of a federal court or the highest court of a state.

+ 3.1.4.3. A report of interview by an active duty career judge advocate prepared according to separate instructions issued by The Judge Advocate General, HQ USAF.

+ 3.1.4.4. Current resume listing educational background, legal and other experience. 

###### 3.1.5. {#3_1_5} For applications under Chapter 5, include the following documents in addition to those required in paragraph [3.1.2](#3_1_2). 

+ 3.1.5.1. DD Form 2088. 
+ 3.1.5.2. Certified scholastic transcripts. 

###### 3.1.6. {#3_1_6} For applications under Chapter 6, Chapter 7, or Chapter 8, include the following documents in addition to those required in paragraph [3.1.2](#3_1_2). 

+ 3.1.6.1. A verified copy of license to practice, registration, or certification, if applying for appointment in a specialty that requires licensure, registration, or certification. NOTE: Verify license to practice, registration, and certification through the issuing source. 

	 + 3.1.6.1.1 Foreign trained physicians must submit evidence of permanent certification by the ECFMG or the Fifth Pathway program. They must also submit a verified copy of the initial license as well as the current license to practice in a state, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or a territory of the United States. 

	 + 3.1.6.1.2 Nurses must have current registration in at least one state, the District of Columbia (DC), the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or a territory of the United States. Nurse anesthetists submit documentary evidence of current certification by the Council on Accreditation of Programs in Nurse Anesthesia.

+ 3.1.6.2. A verified (through the issuing source) copy of certificate of internship training, residency training, and board certification (health care practitioners).

+ 3.1.6.3. Verification letter (from the program director) with beginning and ending dates, if still in training (health care practitioners).

+ 3.1.6.4. Statement in [Attachment 7](../attachments/attachment7.md), paragraph A7.1.1 (applicants for commission in the medical services for assignment to USAFR Ready Reserve unit or IMA positions).

+ 3.1.6.5. Statement in [Attachment 7](../attachments/attachment7.md), paragraph A7.2 (health care practitioners except clinical psychologists).

+ 3.1.6.6. Statement in [Attachment 7](../attachments/attachment7.md), paragraph A7.3(clinical psychologists).

+ 3.1.6.7. Brief statement indicating why individual desires appointment. EXCEPTION:Health service administrator applicants for appointment to perform on EAD submit a one-page letter indicating why they desire appointment. Address the letter to the MSC selection committee.

+ 3.1.6.8. Part one of National Boards (Dental Corps applicants). Submit part two, if available. NOTE:Do not include documents in paragraphs 3.1.6.8 through 3.1.6.17 with applications for appointment of Category A or Category B health care practitioners. Maintain the documents on file at the unit of assignment or attachment. Include a statement with the application from the unit commander regarding completion of precredential screening.

+ 3.1.6.9. Copy of credentials file from previous hospitals (health care practitioners).

+ 3.1.6.10. AF Form 1541, Credentials Continuing Health Education Training Record
(health care practitioners not applying for appointment directly from a training program).

+ 3.1.6.11. AF Form 1562, Credentials Evaluation of Health Care Practitioners. Applicants with hospital privileges submit AF Form 1562 from the hospital chief of staff 
(or training program monitor if in a training program during the last 5 years), hospital administrator, and professional supervisor or department chairperson.

+ 3.1.6.12. Statement of prior professional privileges (health care practitioners except interns, residents, and fellows). Use the appropriate credentials privilege list form. (See NGR (AF) 36-2 for ANGapplicants.)

+ 3.1.6.13. Quality assurance check for physicians from the Federation of State Medical Boards or for other health care practitioners from the National Practitioner Data Bank.

+ 3.1.6.14. Memorandum of personal interview from an officer of the same corps and specialty (health care practitioners).

+ 3.1.6.15. Curriculum vitae (physicians).

+ 3.1.6.16. Malpractice documents (applicants for appointment in specialties that require licensure, registration, or certification). If the applicant has been the subject of a malpractice allegation, the applicant must submit a statement of facts concerning each such allegation. Unless a malpractice allegation has been unconditionally dropped or dismissed or the applicant was acquitted, the applicant must also submit complete copies of the complaint or other statement of the allegations and the responsible insurance carrier’s analysis of such allegations. If the case is not merely a nuisance suit (a malpractice suit that has been unconditionally dropped or dismissed or the applicant has been acquitted), submit a copy of the plaintiff's complaints and allegations and the insurance carrier's analysis of the case.

+ 3.1.6.17. Test scores from the Graduate Record Examination (GRE) or the Graduate Management Admission Test (GMAT) (health service administrator applicants). Applicants with a master's degree in health services administration accredited by the Accrediting Commission on Education for Health Service Administration (ACEHSA) do not have to submit the test scores.

+ 3.1.6.18. Medical College Admission Test (MCAT) scores (Armed Forces Health Professions Scholarship Program [AFHPSP] applicants).

+ 3.1.6.19. Interview with an active duty USAF Medical Service Corps hospital or clinic administrator (health service administrator applicants for appointment to perform on EAD). Interviewers forward interview memorandum for civilian applicants to HQ AFRS/RSHM (Medical Recruiting Division); for other applicants to HQ AFPC/DPAMS.

+ 3.1.6.20. Two but no more than three letters of recommendation (health service administrator applicants for appointment to perform on EAD).

+ 3.1.6.21. Interview with a medical treatment facility commander (health service administrator applicants for ANGUS or USAFR Ready Reserve vacancies). The medical facility commander prepares a recommendation addressing the applicant's education, technical experience, potential to perform as a health service administrator, and appearance and bearing. Do not require this for persons requesting appointment under the provisions of the ANG Early Commission Program for Physicians.

+ 3.1.6.22. Interview with an active duty officer of the same specialty (BSC applicants who are not health care practitioners and apply for appointment to perform on EAD). Interviewers forward interview memorandum for civilian applicants to HQ AFRS/RSHM. For all others, forward interview memorandum to HQ AFPC/DPAMS.

+ 3.1.6.23. Financial eligibility determination.