#### 3.2. {#3_2} Processing Applications and Appointment of Medical Service Officers for Assignment to the Air Reserve Components.

Appointment of medical service applicants (major and below) who are United States citizens, graduates of accredited United States schools, and desire affiliation with the Air Reserve components, will be within 30 days after receiving their complete application. 

---
#### 3.3. {#3_3} Processing Applications to Officer Training Program Examining Centers (OTPEC).

###### 3.3.1. {#3_3_1} Continental US (CONUS), Alaska, and Hawaii. 

Commanders who receive applications under this instruction (except as specified in [Table 3.2](#table3_2), rules 2, 4 through 12 and 18) forward the applications to the OTPEC primary project officer most convenient to the applicant. Before forwarding an application to an OTPEC for processing, the commander screens it to make sure it is complete and the applicant qualifies. Commanders forward applications to OTPECs within 15 workdays after receipt, except when they require additional information to complete an application. 

###### 3.3.2. {#3_3_2} Overseas. 

The MAJCOM having jurisdiction over applicants in the overseas area (except as specified in [Table 3.2](#table3_2), rules 2, 4 through 12 and 18) forwards applications to the most appropriate OTPEC. MAJCOMs may prescribe administrative channels for receiving applications. However, it is the MAJCOM's responsibility to screen all applications for completeness and verify applicant qualifications before forwarding applications to OTPECs for processing. MAJCOMs screen and forward applications within 15 workdays after receipt, except when they need additional information to complete an application. 

###### 3.3.3. {#3_3_3} Examining Boards.

Examining boards recommend individuals who have not held an appointment and have requested appointment above the grade of major under Title 10, U.S.C., Section 12204. The MAJCOM commander having appointment responsibilities for requested specialties or, if overseas, the MAJCOM having jurisdiction over the geographical area concerned appoints examining boards. If required, HQ AFPC/DPPAO may convene examining boards. 

###### 3.3.4. {#3_3_4} Composition. 

+ 3.3.4.1. The appointing authority convenes examining boards composed of an uneven number of officers totaling not less than three. Ensure the majority are Reserve officers and all are in a grade equal to or higher than the grades which applicants have requested. Ensure one of the board members is female if considering a female applicant. Reserve officers appointed to these boards may or may not be on EAD. However, do not appoint non-AD officers without their consent. Do not place Reserve officers on AD for this purpose.

+ 3.3.4.2. The MAJCOM forwards the recommendations of these boards to the appropriate OTPEC. The OTPEC incorporates the recommendations with the individual's application and other allied papers. 

###### 3.3.5. {#3_3_5} Applications for Appointment and Concurrent Ready Reserve Assignments Under Current Procurement Objectives. 

Do not send these applications to the OTPECs for processing. The units having the vacancies a member wishes to fill process them.

---
#### 3.4. {#3_4} Duties of the Examining Centers.

Refer to AFI 36-2001, Officer Training Program Examining Centers
(OTPEC). 

###### 3.4.1. {#3_4_1} Unless exempt, each applicant has to take all composites of the AFOQT. 

See [Table 3.1](#table3_1) for minimum scores.

+ 3.4.1.1. The following categories are exempt: 
	 + 3.4.1.1.1 Former officers. 
	 + 3.4.1.1.2 Officers of any of the services, except those applying for entry into pilot or navigator training. 
	 + 3.4.1.1.3 Individuals applying under Chapter 5 and Chapter 6; Chapter 7, paragraph [7.3](../chapter7/chapter7.md#7_3); and Chapter 8. 

###### 3.4.2. {#3_4_2} Testing requirements for AFROTC students and individuals applying for entry into OTS are in AFI 36-2013. 