#### 3.5. {#3_5} Selecting Applicants.

###### 3.5.1. {#3_5_1} The selection authorities specified in paragraphs [1.5](../chapter1/chapter1.md#1_5) through [1.8](../chapter1/chapter1.md#1_8) and [1.12](../chapter1/chapter1.md#1_12) through [1.14](../chapter1/chapter1.md#1_14) review applications and make selections. Selection boards include at least one Reserve officer. They select applicants through the use of a quality-oriented system including, but not limited to, factors such as education, experience, test scores, potential, motivation, and, if applicable, prior military performance. 

###### 3.5.2. {#3_5_2} Selection authorities generate accessions data as prescribed in the PDS Documentation Handbook 171-130, part one, section 7. 

---
#### 3.6. {#3_6} Personnel Security Investigations (PSI).

Prior enlisted personnel selected for appointment may receive a commission based on a favorable ENTNAC if they have not had a break in service greater than 24 months. For all others a NAC is required. 

###### 3.6.1. {#3_6_1} Appointing authorities must review investigations initiated according to AFI 31-501 before appointment. They may appoint applicants before receiving a completed NAC if:

+ 3.6.1.1. They receive a NAC request with the application and submit the request to the Defense Investigative Service (DIS).

+ 3.6.1.2. The applicant signs a statement of understanding ([Attachment 7](../attachments/attachment7.md),  paragraph A7.4) agreeing to discharge processing if the results of the NAC are unfavorable. 

###### 3.6.2. {#3_6_2} If a selectee was the subject of a previous PSI and there has been no break in service greater that 24 months, a new PSI is not required or authorized. 

###### 3.6.3. {#3_6_3} Send applications through the personnel office (AFROTC members), unit security manager (active duty airmen), or Reserve servicing MPF (non-EAD airmen). That office provides written confirmation of a favorably completed PSI (include the type of investigation and date completed). Obtain data from the AF Form 2584, Record of Personnel Security Investigation and Clearance,  (for AFROTC members), or the PDS (for other members). 

###### 3.6.4. {#3_6_4} Only HQ 497IG/INS has the authority to record clearance eligibility in the PDS. They forward copies of investigations containing questionable information to the appointing authority for a suitability determination. After review of the investigation, the appointing authority advises HQ 497IG/INS of the applicant's acceptance or rejection for commissioning. 

---
#### 3.7. {#3_7} Appointing Selectees and Notifying Nonselectees.

###### 3.7.1. {#3_7_1} Appointing authorities appoint selectees by memorandum or administrative order. They issue appointments as of the current date and make them effective as of the date of acceptance. 

+ 3.7.1.1. Refer to [Attachment 8](../attachments/attachment8.md), [Attachment 9](../attachments/attachment9.md),  and [Attachment 10](../attachments/attachment10.md) for appointment memorandum formats. Do not use an authority line on appointment memorandum.

+ 3.7.1.2. Air Education and Training Command (AETC), Air Force Military Training Center (AFMTC) appoints USAF graduates of OTS by administrative orders instead of appointment memorandums. They appoint USAFR graduates of OTS by memorandum according to [Attachment 8](../attachments/attachment8.md).

+ 3.7.1.3. After appointment, the appointing authority forwards a copy of the appointment memorandum or order, oath of office, and application with attachments to: 
	 + 3.7.1.3.1 HQ AFPC/DPPAOR for all direct appointments as ResAF officers with concurrent entry on EAD. 
	 + 3.7.1.3.2 HQ ARPC/DSFR (Residual Field Records Branch) for all direct appointments as ResAF officers with concurrent Ready Reserve assignments. 

###### 3.7.2. {#3_7_2} The selection or appointing authority ensures persons who are nonselected, ineligible, or found not qualified for appointment, are so advised. They then dispose of application documents according to AFI 36-2608, Military Personnel Records System.

###### 3.7.3. {#3_7_3} When an applicant fails to accept an appointment, the appointing authority cancels the appointment by reason of nonacceptance and notifies the appointee. The appointing authority enters the declination and date on all retained copies of the appointment memorandum and disposes of application documents according to AFI 36-2608.

###### 3.7.4. {#3_7_4} Appointing authorities establish procedures to notify the losing service of the acceptance of their members for appointment as ResAF officers. Notification must contain complete information. 

---
#### 3.8. {#3_8} Designation To Perform Professional Functions as a Chaplain, Judge Advocate, or Medical Service Officer.

A reappointment action is usually required when a ResAF officer is designated to perform professional functions. To apply, an officer submits a memorandum application and attaches documents not already included in the Master Personnel Record Group (MPerRGp). EXAMPLE: Diploma from medical school, transcript of college work, copy of license to practice, and any other documents or information the officer desires to submit. 

###### 3.8.1. {#3_8_1} Accept a certificate of physical fitness instead of a medical examination, if the officer has complied with the requirements for a periodic physical examination. However, an officer who has not submitted a report of medical examination within 3 years before the date of application must submit a current examination. 

###### 3.8.2. {#3_8_2} The appointing authority reappoints officers of the MSC who are medical or dental students as first lieutenants when the students meet the requirements outlined in Chapter 6. (See Table 2.1,  note 6, for authority to reappoint medical students as captains.) 

###### 3.8.3. {#3_8_3} The appointing authority may withdraw designation to perform professional functions and assign an officer to the LAF if: 

+ 3.8.3.1. The initial appointment professional functions performed in another category are not being used to acquire line officer status.

+ 3.8.3.2. HQ USAF/SG, HQ USAF/JAX, or HQ USAF/HC, as appropriate, does not object to such reappointment or transfer.

+ 3.8.3.3. A requirement exists in a line specialty for which the officer qualifies and can be effectively utilized. 

+ 3.8.3.4. The officer agrees to accept reappointment despite an adjustment of grade or DOR. When there is no change in service credit involved, the appointing authority assigns the officer to the LAF in the officer's current grade and does not change the officer's service dates. 

###### 3.8.4. {#3_8_4} When the action does not involve the award of service credit and a change in grade or DOR does not occur, the appropriate appointing authority designates the officer to perform professional functions or withdraws such designation by administrative order. 

###### 3.8.5. {#3_8_5} When the action involves the award of service credit and a change in grade or DOR occurs, reappointment is required. Before reappointment, the appointing authority advises the officer, in writing, of potential ramifications of a change in grade, DOR, or the loss of service credit. The applicant should sign and date the written advisory. 

###### 3.8.6. {#3_8_6} When a line officer on flying status with a current effective aeronautical rating accepts reappointment in the medical service, or as a chaplain, or judge advocate, the appropriate office (AFI 11-402) publishes an order disqualifying the officer from flying status. 
