#### 3.9. {#3_9} Validity of Oaths of Office and Acceptances.

###### 3.9.1. {#3_9_1} Each individual must take and subscribe to an oath of office according to AFI 36-2006, Oath of Office (Military Personnel) and Certificate of Commission before entering the duties of the office. The appointing authority cancels the appointment if the individual will not execute the oath of office without modifications or reservations. In situations described in 3.9.2 and 3.9.3, when an officer establishes acceptance by another means, the officer must submit a properly executed oath of office as a prerequisite for entitlement to full pay and allowances. 

###### 3.9.2. {#3_9_2} Executing and returning the oath of office constitutes a formal acceptance of appointment. (Acceptance is "expressed," as by formal acceptance in writing, or "implied," as by performance of the duties of the office pursuant to an order of competent authority or an obligated Regular officer who accepts a discharge from active duty, contingent upon acceptance of a Reserve appointment.)

+ 3.9.2.1. If an appointee enters on AD or into active status before executing the oath of office, the appointing authority records the date of entry on AD or into active status, as applicable, as the implied or constructive date of acceptance. However, the appointing authority must obtain an executed oath of office as soon as possible.

+ 3.9.2.2. The officer executes the oath as of the current date. On receiving the oath from the officer, the appointing authority annotates it as follows: Date of entry (on active duty or into active status, as applicable) on (date) pursuant to Special Order (#) HQ (Issuing), dated (of order), constitutes constructive acceptance of appointment. Acceptance officially recorded as of date of EAD or entry into active status, as applicable. 

###### 3.9.3. {#3_9_3} An oath of office properly dated and signed by an appointee, but administered by other than an authorized official is not a valid oath, but it is effective as an acceptance and recorded as such. In such cases, the appointing authority: 

+ 3.9.3.1. Obtains a valid oath of office dated as the date actually executed.

+ 3.9.3.2. Forwards both oaths with the application and appointment documents to the proper MPerRGp custodian. 

###### 3.9.4. {#3_9_4} When an individual who is in training to qualify for later reappointment executes the oath of office on a date after he or she completes educational requirements, the appointing authority annotates the oath as follows: Date of appointment recorded for record purposes as the completion date of educational requirements. 

---
#### 3.10. {#3_10} Orders and Records.

###### 3.10.1. {#3_10_1} General Information.

AFI 33-328, Administrative Orders,  tells what series of special orders to use and how to number, authenticate, reproduce, and distribute them. Appointing authorities publish orders to announce ResAF appointment or reappointment, to announce termination or vacation of ResAF appointment, and correction, amendment, rescissions, or revocation of ResAF appointment.

###### 3.10.2. {#3_10_2} Appointment or Reappointment.

Issue AF Form 778, Reserve Appointment Order, or a composed order to announce acceptance of appointment or reappointment. Include items listed at [Attachment 11](../attachments/attachment11.md). 

###### 3.10.3. {#3_10_3} Changes to Orders--Amendments, Rescissions, and Revocations. Organizations publishing the original order, use AF Form 973, Request and Authorization for Change of Administrative Orders, or a composed order, if the form is not practical. Publish in the same series as the original order; that is, amend a Reserve order with a Reserve order. 